+++
title = "Releasing music as a solo artist in 2026"
slug = "2026-02-01-releasing-music-as-a-solo-artist-in-2026"
date = 2026-02-01
+++

This month, I released my first solo album in more than 3 years under the name of Birtawil.
This project is, overvall, pretty modest and confidential.
In the past, I recorded the music, uploaded it on Bandcamp, made a story on instagram and a post on facebook, and I was done.
I did this exact process for several releases. And it was ok, as I didn't have any objectives other than publishing music.
I didn't care that much.

This time, I tried to do things differently, and make an effort on communication around the release, and making it exist.
Multiple reasons:
- I did spend a lot of time on this album, more than usual. It feels like laziness not to talk about it.
- I toured last year as a solo artist for the first time. I really enjoyed it, but booking gigs was a frustrating experience, because no one knows this project. I want the name to actually exist, so that it would be easier to book gigs.
- Since the release of generative AI products, I have kind of an identity crisis. Both my job (software engineering) and my passion (music) are impacted by these new tools, and seeing these things mimic what I do in seconds is both impressive and deeply depressing. It's weird that I want my music to exist more today because of that.

## What I did myself and enjoy doing

Since the begining of Birtawil (circa 2013), I have the same moto: I do everything by myself.
While I did ask for help on specific things this time, there's a lot I still do myself:
- Write, record, mix and master the music. Although mastering has been done via LANDR. I'm sure a mastering engineer would have done a better job, and I'll ask one if I'd release a vinyl version. But the automatic mastering result was ok to my ears, and it avoided the communication overhead, which was nice for me because I had to deal with a few of these (see next chapter).
- Making the artwork. I'm not a graphic designer, and I don't think I'm very good at it, but I enjoy the process.
- Make videos for 2 tracks. I'm by no mean a director. I take more of a vjying approach where I take video sources (mainly old documentaries) from internet archive and remix them to try to tell a story. I think it works well with the music.

I'm still enjoying doing these things and I don't think that will change in the future.

## What I did myself and definitely not enjoy doing

Other stuff I did, but definitly did not enjoy doing:
- Order a physical release. This time I did 50 tapes. It's really difficult to prepare assets for a physical release. Artwork formats, audio formats etc... Everytime I did something like this, it felt like an endless back and forth communication with the factory over some (not so) stupid details. I'm not a graphic designer, so it feels like I need to relearn everything each time, and I'm not good at it.
- Preparing the digital release. If uploading music on Bandcamp, or video on Youtube is pretty straighforward, pushing music to streaming platform was a pain, but mainly because of Tunecore, who was blocking the release for reasons I still don't understand (something to do with the text on the album cover...). They failed to provide any kind of support or explaination on what was happening. In the end, I cancelled my Tunecore subscription and went for Distrokid. My music was pushed to streaming platforms in less than 48 hours without any issues. It seems that I'm not alone in that case. Don't use Tunecore, they just suck and will give you stress for something that should be freaking simple in 2026, while you're actually paying them...
- Preparing assets for communication. For medias, social networks etc... A never-ending list of specific formats to be provided. Not exactly difficult, but so boring and time consuming.

I would gladly delegate a few of these things in the future.

## What I let other doing

I don't like to communicate and I'm bad at it. That's the main issue on why Birtawil is still a very confidential project after almost 13 years.

I delegated that part to a PR agency (Watt Next) that contacted me a few months ago, and already worked with people I know.
The whole thing went pretty smoothly:
1. We made a timeline (which started 2 months before the actual release)
2. I provided all the needed assets to make a press kit
3. They contacted all the relevant medias until one month after the actually release

They managed to get a good media coverage all things considered and I'm pretty happy with it.
It's not cheap, between 1000 and 2000 euros. But hey, I really hate doing all of that, and you also buy their reputation.

Another thing I got help with is photos. I'm not a huge fan of putting myself in the front, and I rigorously avoided that for 13 years. But if I wanted to communicate correctly, images of humans are kinda needed.
Fortunately, I have a friend (Charlotte Pneumonie) who was willing to help and took some pictures with an old film camera, on a cold winter morning in the neighboorod of Meriadeck (Bordeaux), and she did an awesome job.
No money was exchanged here, I offered to help with her website instead.

## How much it costed me

Here it is:
  - LANDR Mastering: 24€ (1 month subscription that I cancelled right away)
  - Distrokid: 43€ for 1 year
  - Bandcamp Pro (for private links and hosting videos): 60€ (10€/month for 6 months, I'll cancel a few months after the release)
  - 50 cassete tapes (monotype pressing): 233€
  - PR agency (Watt Next): 1600€

Total: 1960€

Of course, I don't count a lot of things (the gear used and that kind of stuff). Only what was necesaary for the release.

The probability of breaking even is pretty low, but that's not the point for me. I have a job that gives me that freedom, so, who cares.
